Rahul Gandhi (About this soundpronunciation (help·info) Hindustani pronunciation: [ˈraːɦʊl ˈɡaːn̪d̪ʱi]; born 19 June 1970) is an Indian politician and a member of the Indian Parliament, representing the constituency of Wayanad, Kerala in the 17th Lok Sabha. A member of the Indian National Congress, he served as the president of the Indian National Congress from 16 December 2017 to 3 July 2019. Gandhi is the chairperson of the Indian Youth Congress, the National Students Union of India also a trustee of Rajiv Gandhi Foundation and Rajiv Gandhi Charitable Trust.

Born in New Delhi, Gandhi spent his early childhood between Delhi and Dehradun and stayed away from the public sphere for much of his childhood and early youth. He attained primary education in New Delhi and Dehradun but was later homeschooled because of security concerns. Gandhi began his undergraduate career at St. Stephen's College before moving to Harvard University. Gandhi transferred to Rollins College in Florida due to security threats following his father's, the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's, assassination. He graduated in 1994, the year after Gandhi obtained M.Phil. from Cambridge. Post graduation, he began his professional career with the Monitor Group, a management consulting firm in London. He soon returned to India and established the Mumbai-based technology outsourcing firm, Backops Services Private Ltd.

In 2004, Gandhi announced to enter in active politics and successfully contested the general elections held that year from Amethi, a seat that was earlier held by his father; he won again from the constituency in 2009 and 2014. Amidst calls from Congress party veterans for his greater involvement in party politics and national government, Gandhi was elected Congress Vice-President in 2013, having served as the General Secretary previously. Gandhi led the Congress's campaign in the 2014 Indian general elections; the party suffered its worst electoral result in its history, winning only 44 seats compared to 206 seats won previously in the 2009 general election.

In 2017, Gandhi succeeded his mother as Congress party leader and led the Congress into the 2019 Indian general election. The Indian National Congress won 52 seats, failing to get 10% of the seats needed to claim the post of Leader of Opposition. After this poor performance in the election, Gandhi resigned as party leader and was succeeded by his mother, Sonia Gandhi.

Gandhi was born in Delhi on 19 June 1970,[1] as the first of the two children of Rajiv Gandhi, who later became the prime minister of India, and Italian-born Sonia Gandhi (née Maino), who later became the president of Indian National Congress, and as the grandson of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. His paternal grandfather Feroze Gandhi was a Parsi from Gujarat.[2] He is also the great-grandson of India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru. Priyanka Vadra is his younger sister[3] and Robert Vadra is his brother-in-law. He identifies himself as a Hindu who doesn't support the Hindutva ideology.[4]

Gandhi attended St. Columba's School, Delhi[5] before entering The Doon School in Dehradun, Uttarakhand from 1981 to 1983. Meanwhile, his father had joined politics and became the prime minister on 31 October 1984 when Indira Gandhi was assassinated. Due to the security threats faced by Indira Gandhi's family from Sikh extremists, Gandhi and his sister, Priyanka were home-schooled thereafter.[6]

Gandhi joined St. Stephen's College, Delhi (an affiliated college of the University of Delhi) in 1989 for his undergraduate education but moved to Harvard University after he completed the first year examinations.[7] In 1991, after Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated by the Tamil Tigers (LTTE)[8] during an election rally, he shifted to Rollins College in Florida, USA, due to security concerns and obtained his B.A. in 1994.[9] During his time at Rollins, he assumed the pseudonym Raul Vinci and his identity was known only to the university officials and security agencies.[7][10] He further went on to obtain an M.Phil. from Trinity College, Cambridge in 1995.[11]

Gandhi was adamant on creating a professional career before joining politics. Post graduation, worked at the Monitor Group, a management consulting firm, in London for three years.[12] In 2002, Gandhi returned to India and set up his own technology consultancy viz. Backops Services Private Ltd in Mumbai, where he was one of the directors of firm.[13] Gandhi has been a strong proponent of harnessing the scale and dexterity that technology can lend while amplifying the power of citizens.[citation needed]

Formative years
Rfer caption
Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi meet Hillary Clinton, along with Dr. Karan Singh in New Delhi. 2009
In March 2004, Gandhi announced his entry into politics by announcing that he would contest the May 2004 elections, standing for his father's former constituency of Amethi in Uttar Pradesh in the Lok Sabha, India's lower house of Parliament.[14] His mother had held the seat until she transferred to the neighbouring seat of Raebareli. The Congress had been doing poorly in Uttar Pradesh, holding only 10 of the 80 Lok Sabha seats in the state at the time.[15] At the time, this move generated surprise among political commentators, who had regarded his sister Priyanka Gandhi as being the more charismatic and likely to succeed. It generated speculation that the presence of a young member of India's most famous political family would reinvigorate the Congress party's political fortunes among India's youthful population[16] In his first interview with foreign media, Gandhi portrayed himself as a uniter of the country and condemned "divisive" politics in India, saying that he would try to reduce caste and religious tensions.[14] Gandhi won, retaining the family stronghold with a victory margin of over 100,000.[17] Until 2006, he held no other office.[18] Gandhi and his sister, Priyanka Gandhi managed their mother's campaign for re-election to Raebareilly in 2006, which was won with a victory margin of over 400,000 votes.[19] He was a prominent figure in the Congress campaign for the 2007 Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections; Congress, however, won only 22 seats of the 403 seats with 8.53% of votes.[20]

Gandhi was appointed General Secretary of the All India Congress Committee on 24 September 2007 in a reshuffle of the party secretariat.[21] In the same reshuffle, he was also given charge of the Indian Youth Congress and the National Students Union of India.[22] In 2008, senior Congress leader Veerappa Moily mentioned "Rahul-as-PM" idea when the PM of India Manmohan Singh was still abroad.[23] He was elevated to the position of the vice-president of the party in January 2013.[24]

Youth politics
In September 2007 when he was appointed general secretary in charge of the Indian Youth Congress (IYC) and the National Students Union of India (NSUI), Gandhi promised to reform youth politics.[25] In his attempt to prove himself thus, in November 2008 Gandhi held interviews at his 12 Tughlak Lane residence in New Delhi to handpick at least 40 people who will make up the think-tank of the Indian Youth Congress (IYC), an organisation that he has been keen to transform since he was appointed general secretary in September 2007.[26]

Under Gandhi, the IYC and NSUI have seen a dramatic increase in members from 200,000 to 2.5 million.[27] The Indian Express wrote in 2011, "Three years later, as another organisational reshuffle is in the offing, Gandhi's dream remains unrealised with party veterans manipulating internal elections in the Youth Congress and a host of people with questionable background gaining entry into it."[28]

General election (2009)
Rahul Gandhi with Senior Congress leaders
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh sits next to Gandhi who leads a delegation of leaders from Bundelkhand region in New Delhi. 2009
In the 2009 Indian general election, Gandhi retained his Amethi seat by defeating his nearest rival by a margin of over 370,000 votes. Gandhi was credited with the Congress revival in Uttar Pradesh where they won 21 out of the total 80 Lok Sabha seats.[29][30] He spoke at 125 rallies across the country in six weeks.[31] The nationwide elections defied the predictions made by pre-poll predictions and exit polls and gave a clear mandate to the incumbent Congress-led UPA government.[32]

In May 2011, Gandhi was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh Police at Bhatta Parsaul village after he turned out in support of agitating farmers demanding more compensation for their land being acquired for a highway project. Gandhi was taken away from the protest site and later given bail and dropped off at the Delhi-UP border.[33]

2012 Assembly elections
Gandhi campaigned during the 2012 Assembly elections in the politically crucial Uttar Pradesh election for almost two months, holding 200 rallies. However Congress ranked as the fourth party in the state, winning 28 seats, an increase of six seats from the previous 2007 elections. Out of the 15 seats in the Amethi parliamentary constituency, Congress won two.[34][35]

Congress activists defended the result in Uttar Pradesh, saying "there's a big difference between state elections and national polls and in the end there is only the first family, a hope and a prayer",[36] and pointing out the turn around attributed to Gandhi in the 2009 Lok Sabha national elections in the state. However, Gandhi publicly accepted responsibility for the result in an interview after the result was declared.[37]

In the Gujarat assembly elections held later in the year, Gandhi was not made the head of the election campaign. This was seen and regarded by opponents as an admission of defeat and was termed as a tactic to avoid blame of defeat.[38][39][40] Congress won 57 seats in the assembly of 182, which was 2 less than the previous elections in 2007. Later in bypolls, Congress lost 4 more seats to BJP.[41]

General election (2014)
Main article: 2014 Indian general election
Gandhi contested the 2014 Indian general election from his constituency, Amethi.[42] and led the election campaign of the Indian National Congress.[43] Gandhi held the Amethi seat by defeating his nearest rival, BJP's Smriti Irani, by a reduced margin of 107,000 votes.[30][44] Under his leadership, the Indian National Congress suffered its worst ever performance in elections and won only 44 seats compared to 206 seats won previously in the 2009 general election.[45][46] The Congress-led electoral alliance, the UPA also had its worst ever performance in elections and won only 59 seats compared to 262 seats won previously in the 2009 general election.[46][47][48] After the defeat, Gandhi offered to resign his posts, only to be rejected by the party's working committee.[49]

Post-general election
National Herald corruption case
In the National Herald corruption case, the Delhi High Court dismissed the appeals of Sonia Gandhi, and five others which included Motilal Vora, Oscar Fernandes, Suman Dubey and Satyan Pitroda in December 2015,[50] and ordered them to appear in person before the trial court on 9 December.[51] In 2016, the Supreme Court of India granted an exemption to Gandhi accused in the case. The Congress party, raised objections to the complaint filed by Subramanian Swamy, labelling it as “politically motivated”.[52]

Indian general election, 2019
Rahul Gandhi in an election rally in Karnataka, India
Gandhi speaking to a rally in Karnataka
Gandhi used the slogan "Chowkidar Chor Hai" as a jibe against Narendra Modi, BJP's Prime Ministerial candidate for the 2019 Indian general election.[53][54] The slogan was aimed at Modi in relation to the alleged irregularities and favouritism in awarding the contracts for the Rafale fighter jet deal.[55][56] The said case was considered by the Supreme Court of India and after carefully going through all the evidence, the high court dismissed the case and exonerated the current government of India.[57]

Gandhi led the election campaign of the Indian National Congress party. Under his leadership the party improved its seat count from 44 out of 543 in 2014 to 52 out of 542 in 2019. It also boosted its vote from 19.3% to 19.5% in 2019. The Indian National Congress won 52 seats, failing to get 10% of the seats needed to claim the post of Leader of Opposition. After this poor performance in the election, Gandhi resigned as party leader and was succeeded by his mother, Sonia Gandhi. Gandhi contested the 2019 Lok Sabha election from two constituencies, Amethi, Uttar Pradesh[58] and Wayanad, Kerala.[59] Gandhi won the Wayanad seat in the 2019 general elections with over 60 percent vote share.[60] However, he lost his existing seat of Amethi to BJP's Smriti Irani by a margin of 55,120 votes.[61]

Rahul Gandhi is an Indian politician and the son of late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and former Congress President Sonia Gandhi.

After constant pressure from the party members, and chief proposers Sonia Gandhi and former prime minister Manmohan Singh, Rahul on December 04, 2017 filed his nomination papers for the post of Congress president. With this he put an end to the two-year long speculations in the party circles about his impending elevation.

After 19 years of service, party president Sonia made way for the new President, her son Rahul Gandhi on December 11. The party, through an internal election process —comprising of 9,000 party delegates from different blocks of India —endorsed Rahul Gandhi as the party president.

Prior to this Rahul was the Vice-President and Chairperson of the National Students Union of India as well as Indian Youth Congress. He is a trustee of the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation and Rajiv Gandhi Charitable Trust.

After completing his education under a pseudonym in abroad, Rahul entered politics in 2004 won back Rajiv Gandhi's old Lok Sabha seat of Amethi.

Rahul led party in the 2014 general elections, wherein the party suffered really bad electoral results, winning just 44 seats as compared to 206 seats it won in 2009 general election.

For the 2018 Karnataka Assembly election, Gandhi launched the first leg of party's poll campaign on February 10.

Through his life, Rahul Gandhi has always been the strongest proponent of politics of purpose. Over the years, he has lent his voice to a number of issues but has always remained focused on propagating non-violence, equality and justice. He has imbibed these virtues through a lifelong tryst with Indian politics and history and has developed a keen understanding of the Indian social fabric. Having experienced the pain of losing both his father and grandmother to acts of violence and hatred, Rahul Gandhi  has always been a champion of Gandhian philosophies of ahimsa and truth.

Born on 19 June 1970, Rahul Gandhi spent his early childhood between Delhi, the political center of India, and Dehradun, a town nestled in the valley between the Himalayas and Shivaliks. He began his undergraduate career at Delhi’s St. Stephen’s College before moving to Harvard University in the USA. In his second year, Rahul transferred to Rollins College in Florida due to security threats following his father’s, the late Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi’s, assassination. Rahul Gandhi graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in 1994. The year after, he obtained his M. Phil from Trinity College, Cambridge.

Rahul began his professional career with the Monitor Group, a management consulting firm based out of London - he was adamant on creating a professional career before joining politics. He soon returned to India and set up his own technology consultancy in Mumbai, where he led his team as the Director. The influence of his work in the management and technology sector is apparent in his political leanings. Rahul has always been a strong proponent of harnessing the scale and dexterity that technology can lend while amplifying the power of India’s greatest asset — her citizens.

The call to serve our nation and to be an instrumental part of her growth came to Rahul Gandhi in 2004. He chose to stand from his father’s constituency and continue the legacy of serving the people of Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.

Rahul won his first election with an overwhelming margin of 2,90,853 votes — a testament to the faith placed by the people of his constituency in him. From the beginning, it was apparent that Rahul believed that our nation’s future lies with her people. Through the ebbs and flows of a decade-long political career, Rahul has held true to the very principles that won him the hearts of the people in his very first election.

In 2013, Rahul Gandhi was elected as the Vice-President of the Congress Party. Within the Congress party, Rahul Gandhi played the key role of channeling the party along the lines of Congress’ core principles. He tirelessly worked to democratise the student wing and youth wing of the Congress party and ensured a breath of fresh air entered the grand old party by encouraging young leaders to take up leadership positions. His pivotal role in shaping the party along Congress’ core values over his political career earned him the post of President of the Congress Party in 2017. Under Rahul Gandhi’s guidance, the Congress Party has once again emerged as the voice of the nation.

While he was President of the Opposition party, Rahul Gandhi played a key role in raising the demands of various stakeholders of the country. He championed the rights of the poor & the marginalised. He led the battle against the ruling government on poorly implemented policies such as Demonetisation, Aadhar, GST and more.

The vision of Rahul Gandhi and his strategy to fight the democratic battle with love and unity is what makes the Congress Party the true representative of a united India. Going forward, he aims to put these principles into action by creating systems that provide India’s citizens with the tools and opportunities they need to reach their full potential.

In his current role as a Member of Parliament in the 17th Lok Sabha, he represents the constituency of Wayanad in Kerala. After leaving his position as President of the Congress party, he has put all his focus & energy in representing the people of Wayanad & taking on the government on a number of issues, like the undemocratic abrogation of Article 370 & the violation of human rights by the government in Kashmir. He remains steadfast in his quest for truth, peace & harmony for the people of India.

Today, the Emergency is largely remembered for mass sterilisations and slum demolitions, both difficult to characterise as pro-people or socialist. As the Shah Commission documented, the mass arrest of trade unionists under MISA further punctured any serious claim to a socialist direction.

The main rationale for the priorities of the regime shifting to these two points lay in the quirks of Sanjay Gandhi’s leadership and preferences. The fact that the government’s policy priorities depended so much on his proclivities meant that the nature of the regime could be best understood through the sociologist Max Weber’s characterisation of ‘sultanism’—‘a regime marked by the extreme development of the ruler’s discretion’.

Crucially, the Emergency regime never succeeded in building a level of popular support for its programmatic thrust. Jaffrelot argues that the policy of the State during the Emergency was not to activate the support of the people and make changes in favour of ‘pro poor policies’, but rather to ‘encourage the depoliticisation of society—of universities, factories and the countryside’. The response of the citizens to the Emergency ‘was sullen, not enthusiastic’, as historian Gyan Prakash notes in The Emergency Chronicles.

Clearly, the Modi regime too has ‘sultanist’ characteristics, illustrated in the arbitrariness of the decision to impose demonetisation in 2016 and a hasty and unplanned nationwide lockdown during the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020. The regime is also based on a cult of personality centred on Modi. Images of the prime minster dominate most advertisements issued by the Central government and BJP-led state governments, as do references by the BJP to the ‘able, sensitive, committed and visionary leadership of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi’ on many issues, including containing the covid-19 pandemic.

However, there are at least six factors which mark Modi’s rule as inaugurating a new kind of State, going beyond the ‘authoritarian’ or ‘sultanist’ features that it shares with the Emergency period.

Firstly, unlike the Emergency rule which had only a flimsy ideological commitment to socialist revolution, there is a clear thread unifying the actions of the Modi government—its ideological moorings in Hindutva are absolutely key to understanding the regime. In his book Bunch of Thoughts, the prominent Hindutva ideologue M.S. Golwalkar points out that the essence of the nation is ‘the Hind race with its Hindu Religion, Hindu Culture and Hindu Language (the natural family of Sanskrit and her off springs) . . . In Hindustan exists and must needs exist the ancient Hindu nation and nought else but the Hindu Nation. All those not belonging to the national i.e. Hindu Race, Religion, Culture and Language, naturally fall out of the pale of real “National” life’.

In Golwalkar’s terminology, the three internal threats to the Hindu nation are Muslims, Christians and Communists. Hindutva ideology at its core strives to unite and strengthen the Hindu community, demonise and stigmatise the enemy and assert the superior national rights of Hindus in India.

Also read: Hindu-vs-Hindutva, Priyanka ‘experiment’ — the strategy Congress is prepping for 2022 & beyond

Secondly, the Modi regime draws its support from the vast civil society networks of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), unlike Indira Gandhi’s rule, which was largely dependent on the coercive power of the State alone to take forward its objective. A right-wing volunteer network, the RSS is reputed to be the largest civil society organisation in the world. Andersen and Damle in their book Messengers of Hindu Nationalism document the extent of the RSS’s spread.

They note the presence of platforms and organisations for different spheres of social, cultural, political and professional life—there is the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad for students, Akhil Bharatiya Adhivakta Parishad for advocates and the judiciary, Arogya Bharati for public health, Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh for labour, Bharatiya Kisan Sang for farmers, Bharat Vikas Parishad for social service, Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana for history, Balagokulam for children’s cultural organisation, Gau Samvardhan for cow protection, and so on.

Thirdly, the Modi regime is genuinely popular among the people, as seen by the BJP’s back-to-back electoral victories. This was not true of the Indira Gandhi Emergency regime, support for which ‘was sullen, not enthusiastic’. In India, images of people queuing uncomplainingly outside dysfunctional ATMs after demonetisation or of people obediently and jubilantly banging pots during the covid-19 lockdown on the prime minister’s command have underscored Modi’s popularity and are testament to his mass base and ability to control and dominate societal ways of thinking.

This form of domination over the social common sense has been achieved through most of the mainstream media becoming a platform for lauding the prime minister and remaining faithful to his rule rather than to democratic principles. The media also helps in the spread of the Hindutva ideology by enabling hate speech against minorities and crystallising and deepening the ‘communal common sense’ that Muslims are outsiders to the Indian nation and not entitled to the right to equal citizenship. The deleterious effects of this societal transformation are already beginning to show—from ‘social and economic boycotts’ of Muslim businesses and small vendors to calls for the physical elimination of the Muslim community, all of which presage a dangerous phase more reminiscent of Nazi Germany than the period of Emergency.

Fourthly, the popularity of the regime is supplemented by the power of the mob in Modi’s India. In contemporary India, the images of the lynching of Mohammed Ashfaq in his own house on the suspicion of eating beef in 2015, the lynching of Pehlu Khan on the ‘suspicion of smuggling cattle’ and the knifing of Junaid Khan after an argument on seat-sharing in a train in 2017 are only the tip of the iceberg of hate crimes against minorities.

Also read: Dharma, Hinduness, rashtra — a glossary on Hindutva-Hinduism debate & what it means for RSS

The lawless mob that has arisen during the Modi regime attacks those who are perceived as not belonging to a nation based on a Brahmanical Hindutva—in particular, Muslims, Dalits and Adivasis. The participants in mob violence see themselves as nationalists and, in their self-perception, what others call their crimes are nothing other than service to the nation.

Fifthly, while the power of the mob is one way through which conformity is manufactured, there is now a brazen attempt to make Hindutva ideology a part of Indian law, even if it violates the Constitution. The enactment of the CAA marked a moment when legislative change emerged as a viable route to take forward the ideological vision of the regime. Apart from the CAA, the tightening of the anti-cow slaughter laws in Maharashtra and Karnataka as well as the anti-conversion and anti-‘love jihad’ laws enacted in Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and on the cards in Haryana and Karnataka indicate an emerging legal framework which puts in place second-class citizenship for both religious and caste minorities.

Sixthly, the regime has also not been shy of its nakedly pro-corporate agenda. The pandemic is being used to push through far-reaching changes in areas of social, economic and political life, which would not have been possible without strong pushback if the institutions of democracy were able to function.

These changes—be it the farm laws which benefit corporations, or the dilution of environmental laws, or the further dilation of labour laws—have further marginalised the concerns of labour, environment and public health. According to Oxfam, ‘… the wealth of [Indian] billionaires increased by 35 per cent during the lockdown’. The study showed that what ‘Ambani earned during the pandemic would keep the 40 crore informal workers that are at risk of falling into poverty due to covid-19 above the poverty line for at least 5 months.’

To summarise, the six factors which mark the Modi regime as inaugural in India’s independent history are its rooting in the ideology of Hindutva, the support of the RSS, which has a vast network of on-the-ground volunteers, the undeniable popularity of the regime, the role of the mob in actively destroying rule of law, legal changes that seek to entrench Hindutva and bypass the Constitution, and the naked privileging of the rights of capital over labour and the rights of future generations.

In Jaffrelot’s understanding, as he writes in a Scroll. in article, the ‘Hindu nationalist movement has a long-term perspective and is changing India more than any other political force since Mahatma Gandhi’s Congress’.

Also read: Hindu voters in UP don’t need extremism and call for violence for them to vote BJP

[…] The totalitarian ambitions of the Modi regime are understood by the main political opposition. The Left has regularly characterised it as fascist, and even Rahul Gandhi, a leader of a centrist party which was responsible for the Emergency, has alluded to the distinction. When asked about the Emergency, Rahul Gandhi said, ‘I think that was a mistake.’ He went on to differentiate between the two regimes by stating that ‘the Congress Party at no point attempted to capture India’s institutional framework’ and that his party’s ‘design does not allow us [to do] that’.







